once upon a time
Hollywood knew how to show audiences a
good time take one
alluring fan fatale what are you gonna
do judge me with smoking throw in a sexy
high-stakes plot suppose I were to offer
you 1 million dollars for one night with
your wife and quickly bring tensions to
the boil for some reason you'll also
need Michael Douglas lots and lots of
Michael Douglas
Michael Douglas is the face of a mini
genre of sexy thrillers that first
seduced us back in 1987 with fatal
attraction it could have just been a
quick fling but the box office had other
plans
I'm not going to be ignored fatal
attraction took 320 million in cinemas
worldwide on a budget of just 14 million
kick-starting a wave of similar high
concept thrillers but if this formula
was really so fatally attractive where
are these kinds of films now who killed
the sexy 90s thriller
to find out we'll have to closely
examine the body of evidence
with the explicitly erotic high-end
thriller Hollywood had hit on an
unprecedented Lee bankable formula which
would go on to dominate the early 90s
this new wave of thrillers borrowed from
a glossy high-end porn aesthetic but was
also inspired by slasher horror the most
successful examples of this genre step
forward Basic Instinct blended the
horror and porn tropes often in the same
scene it wasn't just about sex and death
although the sex and death probably
helped it was the thrill of seeing a
legitimate high-end cast in these kinds
of films with ensembles blending a list
icons rising stars and respected actors
such as Robert Redford Glenn Close
Sharon Stone Demi Moore Jeanne
Tripplehorn
Woody Harrelson Linda Fiorentino Burt
Reynolds and of course this guy very
impressive but thrillers mixing sex and
murder nothing new
the sexy 90s thriller owes a huge debt
to both film noir and to Hitchcock look
at vertigo and Basic Instinct
you've got the urban sprawl the
detective on the edge of a breakdown and
of course the deadly ice-cold female
lead and sometimes the 90s thriller went
even further than a marsh and gave us a
straight-up ream a
but the sexy 9 chief driller didn't just
kill off most of its cast it also
murdered subtlety if something can be
spelled out it will be spelled out
what's your new book about a detective
he falls for the wrong woman what
happens she kills him and that
explicitness carries over into the
physical world of the films with no
leading lady left undressed and
considerably more male nudity than was
previously standard in a mainstream hit
less excitingly the 90's thriller also
replicated the often retrograde sexual
politics and overwhelming whiteness of
their post-war inspirations with people
of color relegated to minor roles she's
published and Russia giving that file in
the parents accident copied back out
everything I was formulaic filmmaking
leads inevitably to parody and it wasn't
long before the erotic thriller began to
be spoofed in films not much more
ludicrous than their targets what are
you gonna do Ned blow me away
so what happened why aren't the stars of
today queuing up to hitch a ride on the
latest glossy bankable trash Buster's
who killed the erotic thriller
[Music]
like many killers they'd gotten away
with it before and maybe they've gotten
copy
thanks to Basic Instinct writer Joe
Eszterhas and director Paul Verhoeven
were Hollywood's golden boys and between
them in 1995 they were poised to deliver
their most thrilling and most sexy sex
thriller yet are you nervous
instead they delivered showgirls a
critical and box-office bomb that soar
for Nancy is running scared from the
big-budget
x-rated movies it's since been
reappraised as everything from so bad
it's good to a legitimate masterpiece
satirizing the excess of the sexy
thrilled genre but at the time it fell
flat
the erotic thriller boom had finally
bust a victim of its own excess later
entries in the genre would scale down to
focus on younger teen stars misbehaving
are capitalizing on the small screen
fame of actresses like Buffy's leading
lady sarah michelle gellar
in films with sexually frank dialogue
but much less actual sex just like the
early 90s sex thrillers the late 90s
teen versions would soon in turn find
themselves the subject of parity this
parody extended to a recognition that
the teenage iteration is just as much on
the whitewash as the older films
I am the token black guy I'm just
supposed to smile stay out of the
conversation and say things like damn
yes that is wack
as the new millennium dawned the need to
go to the cinema if you wanted to see HD
nudity who receded but the unbeatable
combination of a list actors with
launching material and a high-stakes
plot which made the early 90s sex thrill
is so popular in the first place isn't
addressed by online pornography instead
raunchy television has filled the niche
with TV shows garland it with
prestigious awards simultaneously daring
to bear
if the likes of Basic Instinct and fatal
attraction were the wayward children of
Hitchcock and film noir then shows like
Hannibal Game of Thrones Californication
and True Blood are their grandchildren
blending high-stakes power plays with
lashings of sexual intrigue and surprise
twists each generation puts its own
stamp on the blueprint with
post-millennial t v-- keen on
supernatural elements something even
basic instincts thriller Queen Katherine
never thought to incorporate into her
own trashy novels we can only wonder
what she'd have felt about the rise to
power of platinum blonde mother of
dragons Daenerys Targaryen I felt like
someone who read my book I was playing
again
you
[Music]